---
templateKey: 'library'
componentKey: 'Article'
path: /library/start-here/cosmology
title: Daoist Cosmology Fundamentals
description: The Scholar’s Way library exists as database for information on our perspective and practice of medicinal, martial, and meditative arts (sciences); rooted in traditional wisdom and made accessible for contemporary students.
---

<!-- ### Welcome message will be here in html markup  -->

<h2 id="yin-yang">Yin/Yang</h2>

<div>Yin and Yang differentiation is a binary method of calculating the energetic characteristic (cause, manifestation and evolution) of all phenomena. The general characteristic of Yang is that of heavenly phenomena, ie without physical form, and Yin is that of earthly phenomena, ie with form; another way to think of these energetic tendencies is to understand Yin as having the an opening, an ability to receive and collect inward, while Yang is more active and outward spreading. As such Yin and Yang exist in a constant state of mutual opposition and transformation, the process of Yin moving towards Yang and Yang towards Yin is the process of life force itself. These characteristics can be represented as symbols, used for making calculations, with Yang as an unbroken line and Yin as a broken one. It is important to remember that Yin and Yang must always be considered relative to one another, and can only be differentiated according to a reference point. For example one can not ask whether something is Yin or Yang, but only if something is Yin or Yang compared to something else. It is also important to understand that Yin and Yang contain one another and thus can be subdivided into more precise aspects such as yin of yang, yin of yin, etc… This process of subdivision gives rise to the energetic calculations of the Ba Gua and I Ching.</div>

<h2 id='heaven-man-earth'>Heaven Man Earth</h2>

<div>The interaction of Yin and Yang gives rise to the manifestation of all phenomena of Universe. The concentration of yang qi gives rise to heavenly phenomena, and the concentration of yin qi gives rise to earthly phenomena. Earth reflects the back the energy of Heaven. Between Heaven and Earth, connecting with both, is Man. Our connection with Universal Qi, through Heaven and Earth, provides the conditions for our life-force to exist. Just as Yin and Yang interact to manifest macrocosmic phenomena, they interact within man manifesting microcosmic phenomena; in this sense we consider man as a reflection of Universe (miniature universe?). Heaven, Earth and Man are called the three jewels of existence. When thinking of Heaven, Man and Earth it is useful to not just consider Heaven above, Earth below, and Man in the middle, but to think of Earth as the substance we interact with and Heaven as the immaterial atmospheric energy pervading the space all around us. In this way we can begin to understand the nature of our relationship with the forces that influence our vitality.</div>

<h2 id='four-directions'>Four Directions</h2>

<div>Heavenly Energy surrounds Earth radiating onto it from all ways. If we consider from the perspective of Heaven we can view any position on Earth like the projection of a map with an x and y axis denoting longitude and latitude; giving us the orientation of the 4 cardinal directions. However from our position on Earth, moving through the space of Heaven, we also consider the directions up and down; utilizing the x, y, and z axis. It important to consider that our perspective on phenomena can be variable according to the standpoint from which we view them. What from the perspective Earth appears to be three dimensional, from the perspective of Heaven can be seen as 2 Dimensional.</div>

<h2 id=''>Five Elements</h2>

<div id="five-elements">We calculate Earthly (physical) phenomena according to the system of Five Elements; (the four cardinal directions plus the center point or from the 3D perspective a tetrahedron+center pt.). The Five Elements can be thought of as categorizations of physical manifestations according to their energetic correspondences; Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal and Water. To see the chart of 5E Correspondences (Link Here). While these categories are emblematic of natural phenomena it important to not mistake them for the literal material from which they take their name. It is more useful to think of the 5 elements as metaphorical terms representing the energetic relationships and tendencies of physical manifestations. The Elements are useful for understanding the relationship of manifestations within each Element (ie, the energy of the Wood element is that of birth and it’s season is spring); as well as understanding the relationship between Elements particularly according to the cycle of generation ( ie, the wood element generates the fire element) and the cycle of restriction or control (ie, the water element restricts the fire element).</div>

<h2 id='six-energies'>Six Energies</h2>

<div>The Heavenly Energy that radiates onto Earth is divided into 6 classifications (Each direction+up and down?); Taiyin, Taiyang, Shaoyin, Shaoyang, Jueyin, Yangming. These classifications are one way by which we can understand the stages of the process of Yin and Yang transforming into one another. For example the energy of Shaoyang is that of Yang overtaking Yin, Yangming is when Yang in full growth controls Yin, and Taiyang is when Yang having reached its maximum is just about to begin transforming into Yin again as Jueyin, which similarly evolves into Shaoyin and Taiyin repeating the cycle. It is these Six Energies that are reflected from the position of Earth as the Five Elements discussed above.</div>

<h2 id='seven-dimensions'>Seven Dimensions</h2>

<div> 7 Dimensions is the system for understanding the inter-relationship (coexistence) between the aspects of existence both in the macrocosm of the Universe and microcosm of the Human Body. We can view the relative positions of Heaven, Man, and Earth as that of Heaven on top, Earth below and Man in the middle. Similarly we can divide the metabolic physiology of the body into top (yang), bottom (yin) and middle (transforming?) sections. On the top of our head we have a vortex where we connect with Heaven, on the bottom of our torso we have a vortex connecting with the energy of earth; we also have vortexes at the top of the middle section, the bottom of the middle section, and in the middle of the middle section. In order to balance out the energy of the top section we have a vortex at the midpoint between the vortex on top of our head and the vortex at the top of the middle section, and to balance out the energy in the lower section we have a vortex at the mid-point between the vortex at the bottom of our torso, and the vortex at the bottom of the middle section. If we count the number of vortexes from bottom to top we end up with 7. These 7 vortexes represent the 7 dimensions of coexistence necessary for both Human and Universal functioning. In the Universe the 1st dimension is a line, the 2nd is a plane, the 3rd is space, the 4th is time, the 5th is mind, the 6th is spirituality and the 7th is divinity. In the human body the 1st is excretory function, the 2nd reproductive, the 3rd is metabolic, the 4th is emotion, the 5th is Wisdom, the 6th is Spirituality, and the 7th Divinity. The 7 dimensions are of fundamental importance for understanding the relationship of our physiology with cosmology and have numerous applications for healing and beyond.</div>

